Feature 81A: 
Order of Subject, Object and Verb. The terms subject  and object  are used here in a rather informal semantic sense, to denote the more agent-like and more patient-like elements respectively. Their use here can be defined in terms of the notions S, A, and P, where the S is the single argument in an intransitive clause, the A is the more agent-like argument in a transitive clause, and the P is the more patient-like argument in a transitive clause. For the purposes of this map, then, the term subject  is used for the A while the term object  is used for the P. A language shown on the map as SOV could thus also be equally well and perhaps more accurately described as APV. Note that many linguists use the terms subject  and object  somewhat differently from this, and some linguists question the applicability of these terms to some languages, but these issues do not arise with the use of these terms here. 
Feature 82A:
Order of Subject and Verb. As with the other maps showing word orders, there are two ways in which a language can count as SV.  In some languages, SV is the only order permitted by the grammar. In other languages, both orders are grammatical, but SV order is dominant (see “Determining Dominant Word Order”). Languages in which both orders occur and in which neither order is dominant are classified as the third type on the map.
Feature 83A: 
Order of Object and Verb. The primary types shown are languages which are OV (in which the object precedes the verb), illustrated by Turkish in (1a), and languages which are VO (in which the verb precedes the object), illustrated in (1b) by Gulf Arabic, the variety of colloquial Arabic spoken in Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, and eastern Saudi Arabia.The third type is languages with both orders with neither order dominant; see “Determining Dominant Word Order”. A number of different subtypes of this type are discussed below. Note that the map does not distinguish languages in which only one order is possible and languages in which both orders are possible but one is dominant.
Feature 84A: 
Order of Object, Oblique, and Verb. An oblique phrase is a noun phrase or adpositional phrase (prepositional or postpositional) that functions as an adverbial modifier (or “adjunct”) of the verb.
Feature 85A: 
Order of Adposition and Noun Phrase. The two primary types of adpositions are prepositions and postpositions: prepositions precede the noun phrase they occur with, as in English and in the Boumaa Fijian (Austronesian) example in (1a), while postpositions follow the noun phrase they occur with, as in the Lezgian (Nakh-Daghestanian; Russia) example in (1b).
Feature 86A: 
Order of Genitive and Noun. This map shows the order of a genitive or possessor noun phrase with respect to the head noun. In the example in (1) from Finnish, tytön  ‘the girl’s’ is the genitive noun phrase, while kissa  ‘cat’ is the head noun, so the order in Finnish is GenN (genitive preceding head noun). The genitive noun phrase is often called the possessor (phrase) and the head noun is sometimes called the possessee (noun), and the construction itself is known either as a genitive construction  or as a possessive construction. It should be stressed that the term possession  is used in this context in a broader sense than the term is used in everyday English. Two basic semantic types of genitive relations involve body parts and kinship relations, as illustrated by the French examples in (3).
Feature 87A: 
Order of Adjective and Noun. English is an example of a language which is AdjN, with the adjective preceding the noun (as in large dogs ). Another example is Mising (Tibeto-Burman; northeast India), as in (1). In some languages, both orders of adjective and noun occur. In some of these, an argument can be given that one of the two orders is dominant (see “Determining Dominant Word Order”). 
Feature 88A: 
Order of Demonstrative and Noun. The first type shown on the map consists of languages in which the demonstrative is a separate word which precedes the noun. The second type includes languages in which the demonstrative is a separate word which follows the noun. The third type consists of languages in which the demonstrative is a prefix on the noun. The fourth type consists of languages in which the demonstrative is a suffix on the noun. The fifth type involves languages where the expression of demonstrative meaning involves a demonstrative word or affix preceding the noun occurring simultaneously with a demonstrative word or affix following the noun.
Feature 89A: 
Order of Numeral and Noun. The first type shown on the map consists of languages in which the numeral precedes the noun. The second type consists of languages in which the numeral follows the noun. The third type shown on the map are languages in which both orders of numeral and noun occur with neither order dominant. In most languages with both orders of numeral and noun, it is not clear whether there is any difference in meaning associated with the two orders. In some languages there is a split among numerals, some preceding the noun, others following.