Feature 81A: 
Order of Subject, Object and Verb. The terms subject  and object  are used here in a rather informal semantic sense, to denote the more agent-like and more patient-like elements respectively. Their use here can be defined in terms of the notions S, A, and P, where the S is the single argument in an intransitive clause, the A is the more agent-like argument in a transitive clause, and the P is the more patient-like argument in a transitive clause. For the purposes of this map, then, the term subject  is used for the A while the term object  is used for the P. A language shown on the map as SOV could thus also be equally well and perhaps more accurately described as APV. Note that many linguists use the terms subject  and object  somewhat differently from this, and some linguists question the applicability of these terms to some languages, but these issues do not arise with the use of these terms here. 
Feature 82A: 
Order of Subject and Verb. As with the other maps showing word orders, there are two ways in which a language can count as SV.  In some languages, SV is the only order permitted by the grammar. In other languages, both orders are grammatical, but SV order is dominant. Languages in which both orders occur and in which neither order is dominant are classified as the third type on the map.
Feature 83A: 
Order of Object and Verb. The primary types shown are languages which are OV (in which the object precedes the verb), illustrated by Turkish in (1a), and languages which are VO (in which the verb precedes the object), illustrated in (1b) by Gulf Arabic, the variety of colloquial Arabic spoken in Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, and eastern Saudi Arabia.The third type is languages with both orders with neither order dominant; see “Determining Dominant Word Order”. A number of different subtypes of this type are discussed below. Note that the map does not distinguish languages in which only one order is possible and languages in which both orders are possible but one is dominant.
Feature 84A: 
Order of Object, Oblique, and Verb. An oblique phrase is a noun phrase or adpositional phrase (prepositional or postpositional) that functions as an adverbial modifier (or “adjunct”) of the verb.
Feature 85A: 
Order of Adposition and Noun Phrase. The two primary types of adpositions are prepositions and postpositions: prepositions precede the noun phrase they occur with, as in English and in the Boumaa Fijian (Austronesian) example in (1a), while postpositions follow the noun phrase they occur with, as in the Lezgian (Nakh-Daghestanian; Russia) example in (1b).
Feature 86A: 
Order of Genitive and Noun. This map shows the order of a genitive or possessor noun phrase with respect to the head noun. In the example in (1) from Finnish, tytön  ‘the girl’s’ is the genitive noun phrase, while kissa  ‘cat’ is the head noun, so the order in Finnish is GenN (genitive preceding head noun). The genitive noun phrase is often called the possessor (phrase) and the head noun is sometimes called the possessee (noun), and the construction itself is known either as a genitive construction  or as a possessive construction. It should be stressed that the term possession  is used in this context in a broader sense than the term is used in everyday English. Two basic semantic types of genitive relations involve body parts and kinship relations, as illustrated by the French examples in (3).
Feature 87A: 
Order of Adjective and Noun. English is an example of a language which is AdjN, with the adjective preceding the noun (as in large dogs ). Another example is Mising (Tibeto-Burman; northeast India), as in (1). In some languages, both orders of adjective and noun occur. In some of these, an argument can be given that one of the two orders is dominant (see “Determining Dominant Word Order”). 
Feature 88A: 
Order of Demonstrative and Noun. The first type shown on the map consists of languages in which the demonstrative is a separate word which precedes the noun. The second type includes languages in which the demonstrative is a separate word which follows the noun. The third type consists of languages in which the demonstrative is a prefix on the noun. The fourth type consists of languages in which the demonstrative is a suffix on the noun. The fifth type involves languages where the expression of demonstrative meaning involves a demonstrative word or affix preceding the noun occurring simultaneously with a demonstrative word or affix following the noun.
Feature 89A: 
Order of Numeral and Noun. The first type shown on the map consists of languages in which the numeral precedes the noun. The second type consists of languages in which the numeral follows the noun. The third type shown on the map are languages in which both orders of numeral and noun occur with neither order dominant. In most languages with both orders of numeral and noun, it is not clear whether there is any difference in meaning associated with the two orders. In some languages there is a split among numerals, some preceding the noun, others following.
Feature 90A: 
Order of Relative Clause and Noun. A construction is considered a relative clause for the purposes of this map if it is a clause which, either alone or in combination with a noun, denotes something and if the thing denoted has a semantic role within the relative clause. If there is a noun inside or outside the relative clause that denotes the thing also denoted by the clause, that noun will be referred to as the head of the relative clause. Headless relative clauses (like English what I bought at the store ) are not relevant to this map.The two basic types shown on Map 90A are languages in which the relative clause follows the noun, and languages in which the relative clause precedes the noun. The examples in (1) from English and from Maybrat (West Papuan) illustrate relative clauses following the noun.
Feature 92A: 
Position of Polar Question Particles. In some languages, the question particle occurs at the beginning of the sentence. In other languages, the question particle occurs at the end of the sentence, as in (3) from Hatam (West Papuan; Indonesia). A third common position for question particles is second position in the sentence, following the first word or constituent, as in (5) from Yurok (Algic; California).The fourth type shown on the map consists of languages in which there is a question particle with a specific position within the clause that is something other than initial position, second position, or final position. For example, in Hmong Njua (Hmong-Mien; China), the question particle occurs after the subject and before the verb, as in (7).The fifth type shown on the map is languages in which question particles can occur in two of the positions represented by the first four types, without one position being dominant. This includes languages where question particles occur either at the beginning or at the end of the sentence. An example of such a language is Koyraboro Senni (Songhay; Mali), in which the question particle is the same as the word meaning ‘or’ (Heath 1999a: 225). This type also includes languages with two different question particles that occur in different positions. An example of such a language is Hunde (Bantu; Democratic Republic of Congo), in which one question particle occurs sentence-initially, as in (9a), and the other sentence-finally.
Feature 94A: 
Order of Adverbial Subordinator and Clause. The first type shown on the map includes languages in which the adverbial subordinators are separate words that appear at the beginning of the clause, as in the English example in (1a) and the example in (1b) from Hanis Coos (Coosan; Oregon). The second type shown involves languages in which adverbial subordinators are separate words that appear at the end of the clause, as in the example in (2a) from Kombai (Trans-New Guinea; Papua, Indonesia) and the example in (2b) from Kolyma Yukaghir (isolate; Siberia, Russia). The third type shown involves languages in which the adverbial subordinator appears inside the clause. In Nkore-Kiga (Bantu; Uganda), the adverbial subordinator appears between the subject and the verb, as in (3). In Yukulta (Tangkic; Queensland, Australia), the subordinator is an enclitic, attaching to the first constituent of the clause, as in (4), where =aka  attaches to the first word in the subordinate clause, ŋapay, and precedes the present tense clitic =ŋka. There are only eight languages shown on the map with this as the dominant type, but there are many other languages in which this type occurs, though not as the dominant type of subordinator. The fourth type shown involves languages in which the adverbial subordinator is a suffix on the verb, illustrated in (5a) for Kiowa (Kiowa-Tanoan; central United States) and in (5b) for Hunzib (Daghestanian; eastern Caucasus, Russia). There are only eight languages shown on the map with this as the dominant type, but there are many other languages in which this type occurs, though not as the dominant type of subordinator. The fourth type shown involves languages in which the adverbial subordinator is a suffix on the verb, illustrated in (5a) for Kiowa (Kiowa-Tanoan; central United States) and in (5b) for Hunzib (Daghestanian; eastern Caucasus, Russia).
Feature 95A: 
Relationship between the Order of Object and Verb and the Order of Adposition and Noun Phrase. The example in (1) from Nivkh (isolate; Sakhalin Island, Russia) illustrates the first type, with OV order and postpositions; (1a) illustrates the OV order while (1b) illustrates a postposition rulku ‘across’. This type is very common, representing the typical situation found in OV languages. The examples in (2a) from Persian and in (2b) from Tigre (Semitic; Eritrea) illustrate the second type, OV order with prepositions. This type is relatively uncommon; it is atypical for an OV language to have prepositions. The third type, VO with postpositions, is also uncommon; it is atypical for VO languages to have postpositions. The examples in (3) from Koyra Chiini (Songhay; Mali) illustrate this type, (3a) illustrating the VO order and (3b) a postposition. This type is also illustrated in (4), from Arawak (Arawakan; Suriname), (4a) illustrating the VO order, (4b) a postposition. The example in (5), from Chalcatongo Mixtec (Oto-Manguean; Mexico), illustrates the fourth type, VO order and prepositions.
Feature 96A: 
Relationship between the Order of Object and Verb and the Order of Relative Clause and Noun. The first type consists of OV and RelN languages, languages in which the object precedes the verb and the relative clause precedes the head noun.  An example of such a language is Kolyma Yukaghir (isolate; Siberia, Russia); (1a) illustrates the OV order while (1b) illustrates RelN order. The first type consists of OV and RelN languages, languages in which the object precedes the verb and the relative clause precedes the head noun.  An example of such a language is Kolyma Yukaghir (isolate; Siberia, Russia); (1a) illustrates the OV order while (1b) illustrates RelN order. The third type consists of languages which are VO and RelN. An example of such a language is Mandarin, illustrated in (5), (5a) illustrating the VO order, (5b) the RelN order. Languages of this third type are distinctly rare. Apart from Mandarin and other varieties of Chinese, the only other cases on the map are two languages in close geographical proximity to Chinese, namely Bai, a Tibeto-Burman language of China that has been heavily influenced by Chinese, and Amis, an Austronesian language of Taiwan (Joy Wu, personal communication), where there is also a possibility of influence from Chinese. The examples in (6) illustrate this for Bai, (6a) illustrating VO word order, (6b) the RelN order.
Feature 97A: 
Relationship between the Order of Object and Verb and the Order of Adjective and Noun. The first type, OV and AdjN, languages in which the object precedes the verb and the adjective precedes the noun. The examples in (2) illustrate a language which is OV and NAdj. The third type is languages which are VO and AdjN. The fourth type is languages which are VO and NAdj. The fifth type shown on the map involves languages not falling into one of the first four types. It includes languages lacking a dominant order of object and verb or a dominant order of adjective and noun, as well as languages lacking a construction in which adjectives modify nouns because the closest equivalent involves internally headed relative clauses.
Feature 143A: 
Order of Negative Morpheme and Verb. the most frequent type, represents those languages in which the normal expression of clausal negation is a negative word which precedes the verb. represents those languages in which there is a negative word which follows the verb, again not necessarily immediately. represents those languages in which the normal expression of negation is a negative prefix on the verb. Type 4 represents those languages in which the normal expression of negation is a negative suffix on the verb. represents languages in which the normal expression of negation is by means of distinctive tone on the verb. While we will see that there are a number of languages that use tone to signal negation, most combine this with some segmental coding or use it as an alternative to segmental coding. . In some languages where there are two such constructions, the same morpheme is involved, as in (13) from Eipo (Trans-New Guinea; Papua, Indonesia), where the same word gum  either precedes the verb, as in (13a), or follows the verb, as in (13b).The first of the types involving a mixture of Types 1 to 5 is Type 6, which represents languages where negation is expressed by a negative word that either precedes or follows the verb. Type 7 represents languages in which one finds either a negative word preceding the verb or a negative prefix, as illustrated by Maasai (Nilotic, Nilo-Saharan; Kenya and Tanzania), where negation is expressed by a prefix m-  in the present and continuous tenses, as in (16a), and by a separate preverbal word eItÚ  in the past tense, as in (16b).
Feature 143E: 
Preverbal Negative Morphemes. In examining the order of negative morpheme and verb, we examine its position relative to the main verb rather than the finite verb; in other words, in clauses where the finite verb is an auxiliary verb, we examine the position of the negative relative to the main verb, ignoring the auxiliary verb. In some languages, this can obscure the fact that the position of the negative morpheme is defined, according to the grammatical rules of the language, relative to the finite verb, which is generally the auxiliary verb if there is one. For example, in Danish, the negative word immediately follows the finite verb. When there is no auxiliary verb, as in (5a), the negative will follow the main verb, but when there is an auxiliary verb, as in (5b), it will precede the main verb, since in such cases it is immediately following the finite auxiliary verb.
Feature 143F: 
Postverbal Negative Morphemes. In examining the order of negative morpheme and verb, we examine its position relative to the main verb rather than the finite verb; in other words, in clauses where the finite verb is an auxiliary verb, we examine the position of the negative relative to the main verb, ignoring the auxiliary verb. In some languages, this can obscure the fact that the position of the negative morpheme is defined, according to the grammatical rules of the language, relative to the finite verb, which is generally the auxiliary verb if there is one. For example, in Danish, the negative word immediately follows the finite verb. When there is no auxiliary verb, as in (5a), the negative will follow the main verb, but when there is an auxiliary verb, as in (5b), it will precede the main verb, since in such cases it is immediately following the finite auxiliary verb.
Feature 143G: 
Minor morphological means of signaling negation. In examining the order of negative morpheme and verb, we examine its position relative to the main verb rather than the finite verb; in other words, in clauses where the finite verb is an auxiliary verb, we examine the position of the negative relative to the main verb, ignoring the auxiliary verb. In some languages, this can obscure the fact that the position of the negative morpheme is defined, according to the grammatical rules of the language, relative to the finite verb, which is generally the auxiliary verb if there is one. For example, in Danish, the negative word immediately follows the finite verb. When there is no auxiliary verb, as in (5a), the negative will follow the main verb, but when there is an auxiliary verb, as in (5b), it will precede the main verb, since in such cases it is immediately following the finite auxiliary verb.
Feature 144A: 
Position of Negative Word With Respect to Subject, Object, and Verb. As just noted, the first fifteen types represent the fifteen attested word orders involving a single negative word. Type 1 to 4 are the four possibilities for SVO languages, Types 5 to 8 are the four possibilities for SOV languages, Types 9 to 12 the four attested types for verb-initial languages, and Types 13 to 15, the three attested types for object-initial languages. I use the expression SVO language here and elsewhere in this paper to refer to a language which employs SVO order in negative clauses. As discussed below with Map 144C, there are languages in which the order SVO is used in negative clauses but not in affirmative clauses. Rather than repeatedly using the expression languages which use SVO order in negative clauses, I use the expression SVO language in this specialized sense. The same applies to analogous types like SOV, VSO, and verb-initial.